Okay, my name is Colson Tuff, and you'd ask me how I
got connected with the company and how I got to
Houston. Right. I was with the University of
California at Irvine when the University of
Houston was on the threshold of a large enrollment
gain because they went from a private institution
to be public in the early 60s. And they just
started, and they were having problems with the
billing program, so they trying to find someone to
head up that program, found me, and made me a good
offer. And I moved and came there. Had you had a
Houston connection? No, no, no. I hardly knew
where Houston was. Is that right? But they knew you
were doing the same thing there. Yeah, I had been
with the University of California for 12 years and
had gone through a lot of the same kind of thing. And
of course, at that time, the University of
California you know, still underway in a huge
program, and I've been involved in that right from
the beginning. So I went to the University of
Houston and... So you got there in Houston
about... 68. 68. Mm-hmm. And we had a lot of work
going on on the main campus, and it was a
single-campus institution at that time. And then
around 69, the coordinating board had done some
studies of population growth in Texas and areas
and then recommended at the University of Houston
established two branch campuses, one to the north
and one to the south of the city of Houston. And I had
the responsibility of trying to locate where
these campuses would be. We also had to get the land
free, and we had to have it serviced by Rosie
Utilities at no cost to the state, which was quite
an undertaking to try to get it.
So anyway, we had a small graduate center down in
the Clear Lake area, near Clear Lake City, near
NASA, had 50 acres. And so I began negotiations
with the Friendswood Company towards acquiring
the land. That was successful. I think we received
around 340 acres or something like that, and then
began the planning for the Clear Lake campus as it
exists now. That's a nice campus. It is. It turned
out real nice. Alfred Newman was the chancellor.
And Alfred was dean of arts and sciences at the main
campus at that time. And I knew him there. And I had
the concept of trying to create a gallery of
education, of having it all in one building.
Because coming from California and seeing those
kids walking from class to class through the heat
and the rain, that was quite a different
experience for me. And so I thought, try to have all
the academic facilities in one large
galleria-type building, rather than having all
these little separate buildings. And so that's
how we did the first phase of development. Well, at
about the same time, we had to find land to the
north. I had heard about Kingwood beginning to
start, which was the development of Friendswood
and the King Ranch. And then someone told me about
George Mitchell planning to start a new
development, which was not at that time called the
Woodlands, but it was going to be a new development
north of the city. So I had made appointments with
the people at Kingwood for Dr. Hoffman, who was
president of the University of Houston at the
time, and myself to go meet with them. And we toured
that area. And then we made an appointment to meet
with Mr. Mitchell. to tour what was going to be the
woodlands. At that time, Interstate 45 was here.
You could just come over the bridge, and it just
stopped at this end, this forest from there. So we
had that meeting. We had a tour with Mr. Mitchell,
and that must have been about around
maybe 1970. At that point, did Mitchell describe
if you remember anything about what his plans
were. Oh, yes. We had the meeting up here. And then
we were impressed with what we saw. And we invited
Mr. Mitchell to come and make a presentation to the
Board of Regents. And he did. And he came with a
member of his staff. And Mr. Mitchell made an
excellent presentation, very impressive, on
what his plans were. He already had some master
plan drawings that had been prepared by some
architects, which pretty well It has not been a
great change from that until here.
There's a lot of changes, but the general broad
concept was there. And he made a very impressive
presentation. What was impressive about it?
Well, just the scope of it, the type of planning. He
had hired Ian McHarg, who was really well-known,
what you might call environmental planner now. He
was into doing the kind of planning that people
talk about today. 20 years ago, he was doing that
planning, how you would plan the land, study the
soils, the vegetation, the natural drainage
areas, the geology of the land, and then use that as
a base for then doing your land planning. Were you
intrigued then with the fact that it didn't seem to
be a typical kind of development? That's right.
That it wasn't typical, and also it was on a large
scale. and was going to be a quality development.
He had also hired William L. Praer, who was an
architect, who I knew from California. Because
William L. Praer, when I was at the University of
California, each of the campuses had a consulting
architect. And we had one for, at that time, we were
starting Santa Cruz, San Diego, and Irvine. And I
had William L. Praer as my consulting architect.
Isn't that right? See, I was the university
architect. So I knew Pereira real well, and he was
doing the master planning, the land plan based on
all the environmental planning that Ian McHarg
was doing. And then they had other financial
consultants and people who were in kind of market
analysis and so forth. But it's just the way Mr.
Mitchell described it was very impressive. Plus,
as I say, the scale of it. So then I think the next
thing that's happened is that a small group of the
regents, I remember the chairman came out, and I
think Mrs. Wortham even came out. The chairman, I
think, was Colonel Bates at the time. And anyway, a
small group of us came out to have a tour of the
woodlands. And after that, we had a meeting, and I
had recommended that we negotiate with the
Mitchell Company to acquire the land for the North
Campus. So it was my job then to work with the people
who were what is now called the Woodlands
Corporation. This is a small group of people who
were involved in doing the planning at that time.
So I was representing the University of Houston,
negotiating with them to acquire the land. And I
had determined that we should get 400 acres of
land. And so I had a number of meetings with Mr.
Mitchell's planning staff at that time. And then I
had occasion to meet with him a couple of times. And
I was impressed with him and the plans that were
underway. And that was satisfactorily
concluded. We reached an agreement on the land. We
had options to get it subject to approval by the
coordinating board and the state. And then that
probably concluded that maybe around 71 or
something like that. And then of course we had to do
a lot of paperwork. And I don't know, for one reason
or the other, 73 I made the decision because of my
opportunities to meet Mr. Mitchell and being
impressed with him and what he was planning, I
thought it would be wonderful to come here because
I'd seen all that kind of planning and development
take place at the Irvine Ranch when I was at Irvine.
And I liked the scale of that size of operation.
Now, you're an architect. You were . Right, right,
right. So I liked that type of operation. So
anyway, I made the decision to leave the
University of Houston in 1973 and come with the
Mitchell Energy and Development Corporation.
And we then had our offices in One Shell Plaza,
downtown Houston. And in 1974, April of 74, we
moved into this building. And this was the only
building that was here in the Woodlands at that
time. The access was Woodlands Parkway here, and
that was about the end of the roads. What was your
job when you first came on? Pretty much what it is
now. At that time, I was involved more in the
overall general planning. And when we moved here,
as we started the building program, I moved into
building development. And my title now is senior
vice president for design and construction. In
the beginning, I was heading up all building
development that included residential also. We
weren't doing much in the way of residential
development ourselves as a company, because what
we did was plan the land, put in the roads,
utilities, and plat it. And then we would sell the
lots to the individual Home builders. To the home
builders. You didn't hold those lots and then when
the building was built, jointly sell? No, we would
just sell it to the builders. A builder would buy 10
lots or 50 lots. He would then build out those, sell
those. But we did build some townhouses called
Settler's Corner Townhouses, which was our first
residential development. And I was involved in
the second phase of the build out of those. The
first phase was the first occupants on the
woodlands in the first phase of that Settler's
Corner development. And when I got here, I took
over finishing up the second phase of that and then
finishing up some of the work at the wharf and the
Indian Country Club, things that had still not
been finished when we moved out here. And then
pretty much got into building development. We
then did planning for some apartments. And of
course, at that time, we were also doing some
office buildings. We did four of these buildings,
this one right here. There's one right over there,
and one across the other corner, and one over here.
So we did four of these buildings. That came a
couple of years after we had built this one. What's
your role in terms of the design? Well, let me
amplify that question a little bit.
Historically, I noticed the Woodlands has a
homogenous architectural style to it. Not just
the buildings here, but the residential areas as
well. Where did that come from? How did that
develop? And I guess the other thing I'd like to
know is a little bit more precisely, or nuts and
bolts, how you integrate or work, you know, your
efforts at design and planning and with
everything else that's going on around here?
Okay. There's a few ways that it works. We have
in our division, commercial industrial division
of the Williams Corporate. You probably know
there's residential, commercial, industrial.
And then there's what they call Mitchell
Southwest. Those are the major divisions of the
Williams Corporation. And then we have staff
departments of planning, engineering, legal,
and so forth. In our division, we have what we call a
regular land development meeting and a regular
building development meeting. And what we do at
those meetings is bring in all the plans or
proposals for land sales for review by the people
that attend that meeting. It'd be just like a
campus planning committee. It's almost the same
thing as we had a campus planning committee. All
proposals come in. They'd be reviewed at that
committee for conformance with our general plan,
conformance with our marketing program, and then
to determine the availability of the site in terms
of utilities or roads or what have you. So that's
how the land plans would come in. Building plans
come in the same way. As we determine that we're
going to do, let's say we're going to do an office
building, we'll select an architect to design
that building. We develop a budget for it. We do a
pro forma for it. Know what I mean by pro forma? It's
the economic model for that particular building
project. And then as we... get the concept design,
we review that at our building development
meeting. Again, just like the campus planning
committee meeting. And we then get the input from
everyone who's involved in that, and that would
include maybe the sales and leasing people, the
property management people, our construction
people, our planning people, in terms of what do
they think about that, how does that conform with
our design guidelines, what we're trying to
accomplish. And of course, You know, it can vary a
little bit with the site, but generally because of
the participants involved, there's some
continuity there. We also have what we call a
development standards committee within the
woodlands, which is a part of the organization or
the creation of the woodlands. The development
standards committee is set up as an overall design
review board. all plans for development within
the woodlands, which includes not only our
company's plans, but for any developer who buys
land for us, any home builder, all those plans have
to go through for approval, for design and
conformance with the development standards that
have been created and adopted by the woodlands. So
there's a lot of review. Is that part of the deed
restriction, basically? It's part of the deed
restriction. It's part of the woodlands charter.
Who developed the standards? We did. The
Woodlands Corporation prepared the standards.
We employed consultants. This goes back probably
17, 18. Is that before you came? No, I was involved
in the initial commercial industrial standards.
We employed consultants to give us advice on the
standards, not only for here, but then in the
Woodlands Trade Center, which is an 800-acre
parcel north of here. And we employed consultants
who were expert in doing that kind of work to give us
recommendations, which we would then review and
decide what we'd want to adopt. Did the commercial
industrial sector develop early on, or was that
sort of a spin-off later? All the building
development, I said it was in one area at one time.
And then at that time, our organization of the
company was along, what I'd say, functional
lines. There was just, you know, like planning and
building design, and then there was sales and
leasing. Do you think you made your residential at
that time? No, no. The sales and leasing, in other
words, the vice president for, let's say,
marketing, sales and leasing, also handled
residential, commercial, industrial,
everything. We were all kind of straight line down
like that. When I think it was Ed Lee became
president of the company, he reorganized it from
like a functional department into operating
divisions. And then each operating division had
the responsibility for their planning, design,
construction, marketing, sales, leasing, all
within that division. So residential was created
as a separate division, commercial industrial as
another, and then all the other properties, which
includes, you know, Cape Royal and Pirates Beach
and Galveston and all that was all put under what is
called Mitchell Southwest Properties. So each of
those divisions then had a head. And then within
each division are people who are responsible for
carrying out the marketing goals for that
division. So I fit in the commercial industrial
division responsible for building design and
construction. When the commercial industrial
division was developed independently, was there
already a pretty good format or policy or program
in mind as to where you're going and what you're
going to try to do in terms of development? Yes, in a
general way. But in commercial industrial,
of course, residential is the same way. You're
very dependent on the market. I mean, you can make
all the plans you want. But if nobody wants to buy
it, it doesn't mean anything. And so we started off
with this area right where we're at being our
initial commercial development, because we had
this street in, we had that street in, and we had the
beginning of this street here. So in order to
minimize your costs, you tend to want to put your
buildings in the area where you had all your money
in roads and utilities, because you want to put a
building here. It may cost you $2 million to get
from here to there. to build a building that may
have cost $3 million. So you just don't do it. So
what you try to do is we try to cluster there. But
then as the road would get extended to here and then
maybe a piece of the road go here, then we develop
maybe a cluster of parcels around that point and
would say, OK, our marketing strategy is to sell
these parcels to small office users. like maybe
medical building or small lot users for
development. And then we would create an area over
here that would be available for large
purchasers, like Pennzoil, who bought 40 acres
from us, for example. So we did have a marketing
plan, but we could have a situation where somebody
would come in and say, well, I want 15 acres, and I
want it here, and I want this, and this, and this. If
we want to try to make a sale, we've got to be
responsive to them within reason as to what we
could afford to do. I'm talking now on third-party
sales. Now, where we are building the building
ourself, it would be because we want to build the
buildings for our own account because we saw the
opportunity to build that building and lease that
space, and it makes it then an investment
opportunity for us. Plus, it enhances the
overall. Plus, it also sort of seeds the market.
Because if you had something going and get some
people there, it then makes it more attractive for
us. That's right. Well, also, we built this
building to house all our real estate offices. We
moved here, as I said, in 74. And we needed this
building as a place to operate from. And then as we
had this, we built this building over there, and
then these two over there. And once we had this,
then we leased the other buildings to other users.
Plus it gave us some expansion for other
departments and divisions of the company. After
this nucleus of commercial buildings developed,
which were all basically woodland coal and
energy, what was the first big drill, you might
say, right through our sale to a commercial? Well,
let's see. I think the largest commercial land
sale was Pennzoil for 40 acres. And I can't
remember when that was, but I'm going to guess that
was maybe 10 years ago. Had there been much before
Pennzoil? Oh, we've had other land sales in the
Woodlands Trade Center, Eckerd Drug
Distribution Center was a good one. I don't know
how many acres that is, maybe 20 acres or something
like that. That was a good sale. Yeah, that's been
there a long time, too. Yeah, that was the first
company to come into the Woodlands Trade Center.
And that probably was probably, I'm going to
guess, in maybe a 77, 78 time period, something
like that. I kind of forget some of those years.
Those were probably two of the larger land sales.
We've had a number of other sales for smaller
buildings throughout the woodlands. How would
you departmentalize, or maybe you shouldn't
even, the commercial development projects? In
other words, I guess the mall is coming on, and you
have the medical area. I don't know if you could
think of that as a distinct program,
complex, what other complex ? Well, we have, as far
as the major areas of development, we have where
the regional mall will be located, Interstate 45.
Are you directly involved in that? I'm directly
involved in it. However, we have a partnership
agreement with the HOMART company. HOMART is the
development arm of Sears. They're headquartered
in Chicago. We are putting in the land in the deal.
And Home Art will be the developers of that mall.
They will also lease and operate the mall. We have a
joint design approval on the design of the
buildings. And we, of course, are donating the
land. So we've been very much involved in the
planning of the land, not only for the mall, but all
the land around the mall. For example, we're doing
a study right now. This is more current. I get back
to your question as far as major areas, but this is
an area that we're planning right now, for
example. This is the southern part of the mall.
Interstate 45 is right here. This is Timberlock.
And we're in an office probably down here
somewhere. So this is just an idea of a study plan
for this particular area. And we want to... We want
to begin the design on two or three major buildings
in this area because we have the long range plans to
develop the small. We want to develop this lake
here, which will act as a reservoir for flood
control, but also can become an amenity. So in
order to locate where the initial buildings would
go, we had to do this planning study. for the
alignment of these roads and the development of
these parcels to determine how we lay the whole
thing out to then determine where the initial
buildings should go. So this is the kind of work I
do, working with our sales and leasing people who
say, you know, these are the kind of buildings we
ought to have, this is about roughly this size, so
we have something to start with. And I would work
with our planning people on the land plan of this
area important, then I'd be responsible for
coordinating this planning to come to an
agreement within our group as to where we would
begin. And then once we begin, we resolve this
planning, then I'd be working directly with the
architects who we'd select to design the
buildings. You always go outside to do this? Yeah,
we only have four people on our staff. We're very
busy. with the work that we've got going. To do the
kind of work we'd have to have dozens of people.
You're a management group. Yes, we're just four
persons who manage everything that we have going
on. So we've got, I mean, there's those lists up
there. I mean, that's just the first page of about
three or four pages of projects that are going. So
we employ, consult, we farm everything out. Our
job is to manage the contracts with all the
consultants that we employ. We hire soil
engineers, structural engineers, surveyors,
architects, structural engineers, mechanical
engineers, electrical engineers, illumination
engineers, interior designers, landscape
architects. So we're hiring all those people and
managing this whole process from beginning to end
and then coordinating in-house to arrive at the
final product, and then also controlling the
budget and the schedule. It's kind of complex. It
is. It's very complex. If you're just doing, say,
one at a time, and if you could just concentrate on
one, it would be kind of fun. But our situation is we
throw up a whole bunch of balls in the air, and we
keep moving. You've got to try to keep them up in the
air. And this is just really starting. Right. This
is just starting. There's nothing here. This road
is in to I-45, and then there's nothing here. So
this is just the beginning of a small phase of this
development in what we're now calling the town
center. So this will be a fascinating development
as this goes on. But anyway, you were asking about
the different areas. The mall is one large area.
There'll be development that will take place
around the periphery of that area. Another major
component is the Trade Center, which is a rail
serve distribution center type of complex. been
there about 10 or 12 years, the nucleus or the? Oh,
it's been, well, I mean, the Trade Center as a land
parcel has been there since we started. But the
first building development was at the Drug and
Distribution Center. And that, I'm thinking, was
we moved here in 74. That was like 77 or 78,
somewhere around that, I'm guessing. And that's
really exploded, not exploded, but it has
developed nicely. Yeah, it's developed nicely.
You expect much more in that area? Oh, yes. But the
commercial development, I would say, has not gone
as rapid as we had estimated when we began, mostly
because there have been so many variations in the
economy and outside influences affecting what we
do. And there are just forces that you can't
control in this business.
probably we started planning our Esplanade
property, which is south of Greensboro Mall area.
We have 180 acres there along Interstate 45. We had
hired a planning firm from Dallas, and we had
probably started maybe about 1979, 1980 on the
master planning for that development. Very
intense planning. And we probably got the
planning done, all our approvals. rented space in
an office building down there that overlooks the
site, built a big exhibition center there. And by
that time, it was about 1983 or 82. And boy, we were
just going terrific, just like this. And we got to
the top. We looked terrific. Then we looked down,
and it went just like that. And we had hired the
sales director to open that place up, and he opened
it up. And we probably closed it six months later.
Is everything still there, pending now? No, the
lease is gone, and the furniture is spread all
around this building. I don't know where the
models are anymore. We had these huge models with
lights and everything. It was beautifully done,
beautifully done. It's just that, like a lot of
other people, no one could foresee the economic
decline that was going to take place in the Houston
area when the oil business went went down and had
you know tremendous tremendous impact on the
Houston area so I'm not telling you anything new
and of course it did here and since we are so far out
from the Houston area we may have been affected up
here sooner than other areas because most people
tend to you know cluster towards the downtown area
but I don't know if there's any perceptible time
difference between the two but We noticed it, and
we started cutting back. We had bids on an office
building, a 12-story office building that we were
going to build at the end of Timberlock, down near
where this site is. We had the bids. We had just
already left the contract, and we stopped on that
project. So those were difficult times. But now,
the Woodlands seemed, in a way, to have weathered
that, especially in terms of residential
buildings. Better than none in a lot of other
areas. Well, the rest, I would say that the wind has
weathered it. It was very difficult times. We cut
back severely in our staff. And I probably had, I
think, maybe 14 people working at one time. None of
us were. Well, the two in 10 improvement were sick.
So we cut more than half of the people away. Anyway,
the commercial really got cut back. And we didn't
do very much. I'm trying to think of what we did do
for a couple of years there. Just small, small
work. Residential dropped a way off. And that
period probably lasted maybe four or five years.
But then we noticed in residential maybe four
years ago that our residential sales were picking
up. And then the next year was really good, and the
next year was even better, and the next year was
better than that. It just kept up going like this.
Well, what was happening is that while there were
less people buying homes, the people who were
buying were going to the planned communities. So
the Woodlands was getting a much larger share of
the market than what it was getting before. And I
would assume it was because the people who were
buying because of what they'd seen had happened to
values of homes and properties and everything,
were going to the planned communities because
they just instinctively recognized that there's
where the value was because homes in the planned
communities held up better than in a typical
suburban development. So our home sales started
to do good and have been very good. I mean, last year
was good. The year before that was good. And this
year has been excellent. Now, you should be
getting a commercial spinoff somewhere along the
way. Well, that's right, because just as when we
began, we had very little commercial, and we
didn't have anything in the way of retail
services, you know, shops, stores, markets, or
what have you. We developed the population. That
population then wanted to have a drugstore and a
grocery store and so forth. So then, in following
your question, One of our other major areas of
development in commercial were the village
shopping centers. So we built a village shopping
center in Grover's Mill Village, and we did
another one several years later at Panther Creek
Village Center. And, in fact, we're in the midst of
remodeling Panther Creek because that's been so
successful. We're going to enlarge the Randall
supermarket and do some revisions to the center.
to continue the expansion of that. And we have done
some advanced planning on another site along
Research Forest Drive. And those really were not
part of the original planning. Yeah, they were.
The basis of the original general plan was to have a
series of villages. Yeah. Like six villages. And
each village would have some geographical
definition to it and would have a group of schools,
churches, shopping centers that were related to
the scale of that village. So yes, we always had in
the plan, planning would just have like a blob on
the map that this is a site for a general, this is set
for a village center. So then when we were ready,
we'd say, okay, we'll take that piece of land, and
then we then will develop that piece of land. Then I
would hire planners and architects and so forth to
then plan that piece of land so that we can build
that out for our market program to have a
supermarket and a drugstore and dry cleaners and
all the other things that go with having a village
center. So going back, so you had the trade center,
you have the... regional mall area, you have the
office buildings, you have the village centers.
Now another large area of our planning
development has been the Woodlands Inn and
Country Club, which is now called the Woodlands
Executive Conference Center and Country Club and
Resort. So we had to be nucleus of the executive
center and the country club when we opened. since
that time we've done a lot of remodeling of the
existing buildings to continue upgrading the
quality of the facilities and we've made a major
conversion of one building which we called the
wharf which was like a small mall and we remodeled
that completely to provide expansion for the
woodlands in for conference meeting rooms the
mall died right yeah the mall was designed Like,
here's the parking lot, and the mall was a long,
narrow building this way, rather than taking a
building and putting it this way, like a strip
center where all the stores could have
visibility. It was this way, so you had to get out of
your car, walk into that mall, and walk through it
like this. Well, that might work in an area where
you've got, say, a million people. You know, all
the apartments are out here, and then that becomes
convenient for them. But when you're in a suburban
area like this, that just wasn't... the thing to
do. And that never was successful. We had it almost
all leased up. We had an ice skating rink in there.
And it started out leased up, but it became
apparent that it was premature. Because we only
had a few hundred people here. And as you know, to
support a hardware store or something like that,
you may need a population of 7,000 just to support a
hardware store. We just didn't have the
population, so it was premature to start that
development. So it was one of the big mistakes.
We've made some mistakes, and we've learned as
we've gone along.
When did the concept of a medical center develop in
terms of building? Well, we
had in our general plan the intent to have a
hospital.
The idea of getting the hospital in was moved ahead
when I think it was Humana. I think they wanted to
either develop inside or outside the woodlands.
And we had already had started a plan for a family
health center within the woodlands in a small
building up Borges Mill Road. with the intent that
we would then go from there to the hospital as the
population grew and the need developed to support
that. They came in to, and then they had to file a,
what is it called, a certificate of, they had to
file for a certificate of need or something like
that for the state. Well, we then got in
competition with them, went through all our
studies to support what we wanted to do. We
submitted ours to the state. We got our approval
based on that. We then created a board to own the
hospital. We then hired the architects and
designed and supervised the construction of that
hospital, turned that over to that board. So that
was the nuclear stand-alone? Yes. Then from
there, there has been developed a private
development, which is a three-story medical
office building on Lakefront Circle Drive. And
then we built a small professional building that
connects to the hospital. And the intent is that
that area would then be the center of other
medical-type buildings around the hospital and
the hospital design so it could incrementally
expand.
And do you see a lot of expansion developing in that
area? Are you doing much with that right now? Not
too much. We had a second professional building
planned And we have not gone ahead with it because I
think that the leasing activity has been very
slow, just as it has been in all kinds of commercial
office spaces. And so we have not gone ahead and
done that building. Is your prime focus right now
the wall, basically? I mean, you personally.
Personally, well, right now I'm involved in
buildings here in the woodlands. buildings in
Galveston, and then I work on buildings that Mr.
Mitchell personally owns in Galveston. In what
way do you work on them? Well, he has bought a number
of old buildings in Galveston in the Strand area,
which are pretty dilapidated. And he started this
probably around 1975 or 76. when this program of,
there were tax benefits for him, and also this
occurred about the same time that Galveston had
created the Galveston Historical Foundation.
And a new man was brought in, his name was Peter
Brink, They had raised some money through a pool,
through the local banks, to try to buy some of these
old buildings before they were torn down because
it was a great collection of 1800s buildings.
Well, the National Register, too, came in and
surveyed them. Yeah, then what they did, they
worked with the Department of the Interior to get
that area declared a historical district so
people couldn't come in and turn them into a pizza
parlor some kind of a joint or what have you, which
happened elsewhere, or tear the building down and
make a parking lot out of it. And so they were just
beginning to try to get that underway about the
same time Mr. Mitchell got interested in doing it.
And I was involved in the first building that he
purchased, and we went from there. And he's now
acquired a number of buildings, which we have then
purchased and then adapted the use of that
building to other uses and to completely restore
the exterior and the interior of the building. The
Tremont House is the biggest one we did. We did the
T. Jeff Leak building and the Marine building,
Hutchins-Sealy building, Hunter building,
Sealy-Hutchins building. You then managed those
properties as well? I don't manage them. I was
responsible for the design and construction.
That's what I meant, though. Yeah, yeah, right.
No,
Colorado is mostly land development. We own what
was originally 1,600 acres of land between Aspen
and Owl Creek, which was called, I mean Aspen and
Snowmass, which was called Owl Creek. And because
of Pitkin County and the city of Aspen's no growth
posture, it's taken years to be able to get a permit
to even develop that land. So we now have developed
some of that land, and we've been selling large,
they're very large lots, but they sell for about a
million, two million dollars. So we finally got
that going. We did own interest in some buildings
in Aspen, but we've since sold those off. We did
that mostly during the 70s. And we now have an
interest in some land called Lake Catamount,
which is about seven miles south of
Snowmass again. That's not right. Steamboat
Springs. That's where the ski lift is going to be on
Catamount? Well, what we're in the final throes of
obtaining now is the ski permit. And this has taken
a lot of work. Dick Brown has been the person. from
our company who has been primarily working on that
because that's been more a planning function and
then when we get into the development part of it
then probably other people will get involved if
there's any building development from our
standpoint we'll probably get involved in it
would you say the prime motive of the commercial
development in the woodlands has been to provide
jobs for people who move here to make money for for
the woodlands corporation all of the above, or how
does that fit into the scheme of things? Well, it
fits in the scheme in that what we're trying to do to
make the whole woodland successful is to make it
truly a new community and not have it just be a
bedroom community where you live and then you
commute 20 or 30 miles to some other place, work
there, then come back here, sleep at night, and
repeat that process. So what we've been trying to
do is create a job base here. And so it serves a
number of purposes. One, by creating a job base
here, that means that people can buy a home here,
find a job here. It gets away from this business of
people commuting all over the place. So we're
really trying to create a new town or a satellite
community, just like in new towns in Sweden and
Finland and England and France. although their
approach is different. They just say, you know,
this is going to be it, and you will go there, and
that's where you're going to be. We're subject to
the market forces of our economy, and we can't
control anything except try to do a better job and
give a better product at a better price to hope that
people will then come in and move here. So that's
one part of it. Another part of it is to make money,
to make a profit to pay for this, because if we don't
make a profit, we go broke, and nothing happens.
So... One, we're trying to keep a job base. By
creating a job base, that makes it attractive for
people to move in. When people are moving in, that
makes it attractive for retail people, the
hardware store guy and the drug store guy, to move
in because these people are here. So you get a
synergy going of these things affecting each
other. And then, of course, as I say, we hope to,
because of the tremendous investment we're
putting in the land development here, realize
some of the value that we're creating and build a
building, hopefully, so we can then lease it and
make some money off of it.
I'm not sure what this question is, but are there
any disabilities in putting commercial
establishments here? In other words, what are
your hurdles in getting people to come in a
commercial context, businesses and so forth?
Well, it's very difficult because we're
influenced by the whole Houston metropolitan
economy. In addition, we are some 25 miles plus
from the central business district of Houston.
So it makes it very hard to get people to move out
here. Generally, we've found that there becomes a
hurting instinct, like West Houston has
developed tremendously, the West Memorial,
Houston area, Park 10, and all that. I believe
that's happened because all the managers,
executives that were working downtown Houston
all lived in that memorial area. When this area
west developed, they could still stay in their
homes there. The children could go to the same
school. Their wives could go shopping the same
places. And they could still stay there and have
all their new buildings out here. Just change
their focus a little bit. That's right. We've been
at a point where we didn't have any trees here. So we
had to try to attract people to buy into here and
then hope that those people could spin off some
business or get here. But we've had to really work
it the other way and try to get the companies to
build buildings here or to leave space for us in the
buildings that we built in the hope of attracting
them there and hoping that they would grow and then
they would buy houses in the woodlands. So yes,
that has been very difficult. And unfortunately,
during the time that we have been underway, we
opened in 74. There was a decline in the economy, if
you remember.